Music is generally defined as the art of arranging sound to create some combination of form, harmony, melody, rhythm or otherwise expressive content. Exact definitions of music vary considerably around the world, though it is an aspect of all human societies, a cultural universal. While scholars agree that music is defined by a few specific elements, there is no consensus on their precise definitions. The creation of music is commonly divided into musical composition, musical improvisation, and musical performance, though the topic itself extends into academic disciplines, criticism, philosophy, and psychology.

Music may be performed or improvised using a vast range of instruments, including the human voice. In some musical contexts, a performance or composition may be to some extent improvised. For example, in Hindustani classical music, the performer plays spontaneously while following a partially defined structure and using characteristic motifs. In classical European music, performers usually play from written musical notation. In popular music, performers often learn songs by ear and play or sing them in their own style, sometimes with a rhythm section consisting of drums and bass guitar accompanying melody instruments such as guitars and keyboards.

Music theory is the study of the practices and possibilities of music. The Oxford Companion to Music describes three interrelated uses of the term music theory: The first is what is otherwise called rudiments, currently taught as the elements of notation, of key signatures, of time signatures, of rhythmic notation, and so on. The second is the study and the formulation of the methods and concepts that composers and other musicians use in creating and performing music. The third is an area of academic study that investigates music as a subject in itself rather than as a means to another end.

Throughout history, music has been an important part of ritual and religious ceremonies. Music was an important part of social and cultural life in ancient Greece: mixed-gender choruses performed for entertainment, celebration and spiritual practices. The music of Greece was a major part of ancient Greek theater.
