Artificial intelligence (AI) is intelligence demonstrated by machines, as opposed to the natural intelligence displayed by animals including humans. AI research has been defined as the field of study of intelligent agents, which refers to any system that perceives its environment and takes actions that maximize its chance of achieving its goals.

The term "artificial intelligence" had previously been used to describe machines that mimic and display human cognitive skills associated with the human mind, such as learning and problem solving. This definition has since been rejected by major AI researchers who now describe AI in terms of rationality and acting rationally, which does not limit how intelligence can be articulated.

Machine learning is a method of data analysis that automates analytical model building. It is a branch of artificial intelligence based on the idea that systems can learn from data, identify patterns and make decisions with minimal human intervention. Deep learning is a subset of machine learning that uses neural networks with many layers to analyze various factors of data.

AI applications include advanced web search engines, recommendation systems used by streaming services, understanding human speech such as Siri and Alexa, self-driving cars, generative and creative tools, and superhuman play in strategic games. As machines become increasingly capable, tasks considered to require intelligence are often removed from the definition of AI, a phenomenon known as the AI effect. For instance, optical character recognition is frequently excluded from things considered to be AI.

Artificial intelligence was founded as an academic discipline in 1956, and in the years since has experienced several waves of optimism, followed by disappointment and the loss of funding, followed by new approaches, success and renewed funding. AI research has tried and discarded many different approaches, including simulating the brain, modelling human problem solving, formal logic, large databases of knowledge and imitating animal behaviour.
